Follow standard explainer template (#14)
webmachinelearning/model-loader: explainer.md

# Web ML Model Loader API Explainer

## Introduction

The Machine Learning Model Loader API is a proposed web API to take a custom, pre-trained machine learning (ML) model 
in a standard format, and apply it to example data in JavaScript in order to perform inference, like classification,
regression, or ranking. The idea is to make it easy and performant to use a custom, pre-built machine learning model
in web apps, across devices and browsers.

## Authors

*   Jonathan Bingham
*   Honglin Yu

## Participate

*   [Issue tracker](https://github.com/webmachinelearning/model-loader/issues)

> *   [Web ML Working group](https://www.w3.org/groups/wg/webmachinelearning)

Reviewer: This spec is currently in the Community Group.

```suggestion
*   [Web Machine Learning Community Group](https://www.w3.org/groups/cg/webmachinelearning)

```

## Goals

> Like the related [Web NN](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn) proposal, some of the main the goals are: 

Reviewer: Given WebNN is a WG deliverable, it is preferred to use a term "specification" over "proposal".

```suggestion
Like the related [Web Neural Network API](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn) specification, some of the main the goals are: 
```

The Model Loader API also has these additional goals:

*   Provide an API targeted at web developers, rather than ML framework authors. 
*   Optimize model execution beyond what's possible if each operation needs to be expressed as a Javascript method call.
*  Allow faster evolution by limiting the JavaScript API surface and relying on an external model format, rather than
   relying on a set of builder methods in JavaScript.

## Non-Goals

*   Support training a model in the browser
*   Modify a model at run time
*   Enable federated learning
*   Offer pre-trained models provided by the browser

The non-goals can be addressed with client-side JavaScript libraries and published models, or future Web APIs. 

## User research

The API is modeled after existing ML model loading APIs like:

*   [TensorFlow Serving](https://www.tensorflow.org/tfx/serving/serving_basic)
*   [Clipper](https://github.com/ucbrise/clipper)
*   [TensorRT Inference Server](https://catalog.ngc.nvidia.com/orgs/nvidia/containers/tensorrtserver)
*   [MXNet Model Server](https://github.com/awslabs/multi-model-server)

> These and other  APIs are already widely used by many products and organizations for large volumes of requests.

Reviewer: Whitespace nit.

```suggestion
These and other APIs are already widely used by many products and organizations for large volumes of requests.

```

Most web developers just want to perform inference on a pre-trained model. They don’t need to construct a model in
JavaScript, so the web platform API surface doesn’t need to include all of those operations, and web developers wouldn’t
use them directly.

In the graph API, the operation definition is encoded in JavaScript and must be approved one by one. With a model loader
API, the shape of the API is approved once, and then the file format can be updated by external maintainers. The web
standards process can approve updates to the spec for the format.

We'll need to do some benchmarking to understand if there are performance differences, and get feedback from developers to
see if it's valuable to offer both types of API.

Note that the model loader API could be implemented on top of a graph API by parsing the model into the graph. We're working
to share common data structures and API surfaces for both types of API in order to keep them in sync.

## Application-specific APIs

Application-specific APIs like face detection and barcode detection are also a complementary approach. They have some
limitations:

> Developers want to run custom models too. Application-specific APIs can cover the top use cases only, and with limited flexibility

Reviewer: Nit, trailing "."
```suggestion
Developers want to run custom models too. Application-specific APIs can cover the top use cases only, and with limited flexibility.
```

Organizations want to differentiate based on their data and their own trained models. They can’t with canned models.

The APIs may give different results on different browsers, if the models themselves are provided with the browser and
operating system.

A generic Model Loader API addresses these concerns. Something like the Shape Detection APIs could be built on top of the
Model Loader API, with the benefit that developers could swap in their own models, and use those same models across browsers
and devices.

## Multiple model formats

In order to potentially support multiple model formats, we considered creating a distinct MLModelLoader class for
TFLiteModelLoader, to allow the method signature to support TF Lite specific attributes and be more friendly to IDEs.
Given that our goal is to support a common web standard format, and the method signature for common model formats like
TFLite and ONNX can be unified, we opted to stay with a more general class.

## Stakeholder feedback / opposition

> The Model Loader API is currently included within the tentative scope of the
> [proposed charter]https://www.w3.org/2021/02/proposed-machine-learning-charter.html() for the Web ML Working Group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Model Loader API is currently included as a Tentative Specification in the
[Web Machine Learning Working Group Charter](https://www.w3.org/2021/04/web-machine-learning-charter.html).
```

*   Apple: No public signals.  
*   Google: Positive
*   Intel : Collaborating in Working Group
*   Microsoft: Collaborating in Working Group
*   Mozilla: No public signals

> *  Salesforce: Collaborating in Working Group

Reviewer: Whitespace nit:
```suggestion
*   Salesforce: Collaborating in Working Group
```
